Hello everyone, today, the Heart-Viewing Enlightenment
Hall would like to answer your question,
Nguyen Thi Thao, regarding
how to reconnect with love
after the storms of anger and resentment in your heart
towards your mother and those
around you. My
dear friend, I respectfully ask for your help. First,
I wish you and all fellow practitioners peace,
good health, and a warm Vu Lan season. I have a
long-held concern and I respectfully ask for your help.
Because you are also a mother, I won't
hide anything from you. My mother and I have different personalities;
she is hot-tempered and irritable, and I am also hot-
tempered, but I know my place and try to restrain myself.
I prefer women, so rude words easily make
me angry. Since childhood, my mother and I have
only needed affection; having conversations
like close friends is even harder.
Sadly, these petty arguments
are what have caused us to drift further and
further apart, like a long-term internal conflict
within my kidneys. After a Down
syndrome episode, when I wake up, I don't know
who I am or where I am, so when I see my mother, I hug her tightly
like a newborn baby.
Then it's not really hard to understand. Not
only between mother and child, but
also relationships among other people in society are
easily broken down by petty anger, jealousy, envy, rivalry, and
criticism.
In recent years, I have been
trying to understand both my mother and
everyone around me better because I see that
even a small conflict, although not
lasting, is very difficult to mend back to its original state.
What do mothers expect from their children? If
the child fulfills their wishes, of course,
they are extremely happy, but if they don't
achieve them, they will be disappointed and easily irritable. Is this the
case with my mother and me? I would like to express my
gratitude to you, teacher and fellow practitioners.
Dear friends, your name is Thao, and
she has an illness,
epilepsy. But in your question, let's
consider the
issue you asked about first, which
is whether your feelings are
due to you not meeting your
mother's expectations, causing her to easily become
angry. Hmm, slowly,
from a positional perspective...  The mother,
before Orito, when her younger sister was
lying there, the mother didn't know about Buddhism. It's truly
ironic because, usually,
parents who give birth to children, for
example,
want their child to be a Bodhisattva—
that is, their child to be a symbol, an
embodiment of themselves. For example, if
they aren't very beautiful, they
want their child to be beautiful; if
they aren't respected,
they want their child to be
respected; if they don't have a degree,
they want their child to have one; if they
don't have status,
they want their child to have
status; if they don't have wealth, they want their child to have wealth. Because of this desire, the mother
pours all her efforts into compensating for her child's
life.
All mothers
have this feeling;
whatever shortcomings or regrets they have,
they want their child to have
more. That's why the elders often...
The saying goes, "A son surpassing his father brings blessings to the family."
Parents feel happy when their child
surpasses
them and always wish for their child to be better than them in some way.
If their child is
not better than them, or even equals them, then it's
truly disappointing.
This disappointment
will naturally affect the
mother's psychology, causing her to become
irritable,
angry, scold,
or even act in a way that creates conflict.
But all of that
doesn't affect the
mother's love for her child.
Even if the child's expectations are
dashed, if the child goes to prison,
the mother will follow them to the prison to
care for them. If the child does
something that affects all their assets, the
mother will sell everything
for them.
Or if the child needs
blood, meat, or anything else, the mother is
ready to sacrifice everything.
The things a child does that
shatter a mother's expectations will
create a dialogue between mother and child. This communication between mother and child will
give rise to anger and
conflict, meaning the mother is always
disappointed in her child, and all that
scolding is meant to help the child
grow, not to give them
a break. Ask your child, and there's nothing wrong with any of the
mother's actions
towards her child, whether angry, hitting,
or anything else. It doesn't
affect her love. A
mother's love for her child is a
love that sacrifices even her own personality for her
child.
Yes, but daily interactions are
just anger, just
dissatisfaction. For example, if the child doesn't listen
to her, then
that's just external anger. It's
like a bag; the
outside of the bag, even if dirty, doesn't
affect the inside. The bag itself remains dirty,
but the bag...  That's still
enough to cover the seat, the spilled
inside... a mother's love
for her child is complete love, a
love that sacrifices even her own life,
not even her life, let alone
possessions. A mother's love
for her child is pure, compassionate, sacred, and
very noble. The only exception is those
cases where, in
school, people think impulsively, for example,
we see mothers who
give birth and then abandon their children.
Yes, those cases are just
moments of impulsiveness, my friends.
But after that moment,
the mother will feel remorse and
want to find out if her child is still alive or if
her child died.
Those actions are called abnormal behavior
stemming from impulsive thinking,
but they don't affect or
diminish the mother's love
for her child. So, if our parents
treat us in a certain way,
we must understand the true nature of what
we do.  Do I let my parents lose
hope, or am I truly a
bad person, which is why they get
angry with me? But
true love is something a mother never
loses. Because
without that love, how
could she have overcome my
illness? How
could she have forgotten her youth, worked
hard, borrowed money, and struggled to provide for
my health and food? A
mother's love for her child
is a complete and pure love,
truly
precious.
Yes, if we live in this world, it's
hard to find
a love as noble
as a mother's love for
her child, except for those who
guide us through
many lifetimes—many lives to
lead us on the path to
liberation. That love is often
compared to a mother's love,
but in reality,
that mother's love has developed into a
higher form of love.  What is more precious is that if the
teachers of the Dharma follow you through
many lifetimes, they can assist you in achieving
enlightenment. Perhaps it's from a
past life's karmic connection that they have supported
you. And so, they go through
many lifetimes of birth and death to support
you. That love is like a
mother's love;
that love is supported by their
clear wisdom and
noble vows, allowing them to follow
you. My mother also has
such complete love, but due to ignorance,
she cannot follow me.
If she knew what
I was thinking, she would follow me.
I'm telling you this so I can
share with you, fellow practitioners,
that a mother's love is very complete,
very noble, very precious. Therefore,
we need to understand and treat
our mothers accordingly, regardless of who they are.
After understanding this, we can
establish a
relationship between ourselves and our mothers. She may hit us, she
may...  You might scold me, you might blame me, you
might treat me in a way that makes me feel
hurt or dissatisfied—that's how
I feel. But I ca
n't treat my mother like that because
I'm a child. Even when I'm
older, when I get married,
I might not be good to my mother.
But my mother will
never be bad to me. Even if I get married and face hardships, I'll always come
back to my mother. She'll always be there
to welcome me with open arms. But my husband and wife might
not be so
welcoming because the love between husband and wife is...
well, it's a lower level of affection compared to the love between mother and
child. So, I want to
share with you all that a
mother's love is very noble and
complete. In your question,
you mentioned that when you have an epileptic seizure and you
wake up,
you see your mother beside you and you
hug her.
You said you didn't even recognize yourself.  You may
not recognize where you are, but
your mother is always with you.
In the Ullambana Sutra, the Buddha taught that a hundred-year-old mother
loves her eighty-year-old child. No matter
how successful her child becomes, to
her, you are still a child.
Sometimes we don't understand this;
many people don't understand it.
Therefore, when a mother gives advice, they feel
that their mother is outdated and doesn't know
this or that. The practice of mindfulness and contemplation is
n't about empty
platitudes or superficial sharing. Even when parents and even your uncle say something,
you must listen. You acknowledge what you can do, and
respond with, "I'll see what I can do."
Therefore, mindfulness and
contemplation are not in conflict with your parents. You also want to share
this with young people, and for
those who are gone, it remains
in your heart. Parents are gone, and sometimes all that
remains is regret and remorse, a lack of
opportunity to apply it.  Treat
your parents with genuine understanding and wisdom.
Because your parents are gone, Uncle Hoan
sincerely hopes that you all understand the
true meaning of parental love.
So that we can have better ways of behaving
in the future, if our parents are not gone, so
we won't have any regrets.
We will always
feel proud of ourselves for having
almost completely fulfilled our responsibilities to our parents, especially during their
most difficult times, when they
were by our side. And if we say
where a parent's heart is directed, it's always
towards their child. Parents' hearts are
never like turtles; no matter
how far apart they are,
parents will always be directed
towards their child. For example, among the original spiritual paths
here, has anyone ever had an abortion when they were still very young?
Yes, some spiritual paths have seen that even
after a year, they still
remember the
aborted fetus.
Perhaps the father does
n't remember, but the mother doesn't. They really do
n't remember. They remember so much, I don't know.  I do
n't know what it's like, I don't know
where to go. A mother never
forgets her child, no matter what,
even if her child kills countless people and
goes to prison, deep down
she still wants her child to live. It's not that she wants her child to
live because she agrees with the
evil deeds her child committed. That's not
it. Knowing it's wrong and she doesn't agree,
but still, that's the mother's feeling.
Do you see that right?
Yes, that's the mother's heart. She never
wants her child to suffer.
When her child is sick, she carries her
child on her shoulders.
At that time, she didn't know about
Buddhism, so she looked up to the sky and said, "Oh
God, how can you let me suffer in place of my child?
My child is so young, doesn't know anything, let me suffer in place of my child." Truly, if you can find a
child who wants to suffer in place of their mother, it's very
rare, but for a mother,
almost 100% of the time she
wants to suffer in place of her child.  Giving your child a substitute
for your own child, because when a baby is just born, they get a little
feverish.
Anyone who's
a mother knows what it's like
when a mother cries, she cries uncontrollably. Seeing
her child in such pain is heartbreaking. She
runs back and forth, sometimes her mind goes blank.
If her child is in too much pain,
she doesn't know what to do or how to
handle it.
Yes, what makes a mother like that
is love.
That's love, that's the path of compassion. So here, I
want to remind
young people that
even if a mother scolds her child, it's because she
wants them to be better. No matter how harsh a mother may be, it's simply because
she doesn't understand, she doesn't know how to
make her child understand. She
only knows how to scold or use whatever
suits her personality. But deep down, no matter how harsh, how much she
uses, or whatever means she employs, it all stems
from the longing for her
child's happiness.  Eating
happily, wanting my child to be happy. If you
understand that, we
usually don't get angry with our
parents, but instead know how to turn back and
correct our mistakes to ease their sadness.
Okay, so when I was little, I bathed at Uncle Hoan's place. That means
when my understanding wasn't fully developed, I
had some anger and resentment towards my parents,
but now my mind is
focused on my true self, and I return to that state. I
never
let the distance between myself and my parents grow.
When I was little, I would
always contact my parents. My siblings
often gave me a nickname: "
smooth talker." That means I never make my parents angry for long. For example, if my mother had something to
say, I would immediately turn around and ask my parents. Therefore, I was rarely scolded by my
parents and was considered the most spoiled child in the family. From
childhood to adulthood, I was never
punished except once, when my father
wanted to pull out my tooth, and I
cried.  I clenched my teeth tightly,
and the Bodhisattva gave me a chance to
open my mouth. There was only one thing I never did: I was never
hit
because of my mind's perfect contemplation. At
that time, I didn't have the conscious ability to
analyze things like this. But at that time, I just
wanted not to make my
parents
sad. In my
mind's perfect contemplation, whatever happened, I would do it ...
My dear child, while sleeping,
suddenly felt unable to breathe.
Opening my eyes, I saw my mother using a
bamboo fan.
It was a long, round fan, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like this, like
this. So, my mother was fanning me. When I suddenly opened my eyes, it was
probably because the wind was too weak, making it difficult for me to breathe. If I had been so angry, then my mother would have been too sleepy. How could I have fallen asleep like this?
Because I was so sleepy, I drifted off to sleep. My dear child,
though very young,
sensed the hardship and the
love of my mother. I gently and
quietly got out of bed and went
outside into the yard, into the pitch-black night. I
started to lift my head and
buttocks towards the sky, and that's how I could breathe. So I kept
lowering my head and buttocks
to breathe, with the clear awareness that I did
n't want my mother to fan me.  For me, because at
that time I saw my mother sleepy, her arms tired,
and she was tired. It was that one and
only time that my mind perceived and
felt my mother's love. From
then on, until I grew up, until my
mother was old and passed away, my mind
completely understood my mother. I
never truly understood her,
never blamed her, and
always considered what she needed and
what made her happy.
That's why
today, I, Uncle Hoang, share with you the
feelings of a mother from past lives. Why do my parents scold and
hit me? And
why do my mother have expectations of me? Yes, my mother wants me to be happy,
not because she
wants to be praised or
because of her ego. It's not about
wanting to be better than others; that's not it. Being better than
others only creates a sense of pride. The
real reason is that parents only
want their children to be happy.
If you say that parents only want their children to be
better...  Parents go around showing off and boasting to
neighbors, and they've done everything they can
to make me suffer, even if it's just so they can
show off to the
neighbors. But that's not it;
my parents want me to succeed, to become
accomplished, to enjoy happiness, and it's
the happiness they're proud of
having a child who is happy.
That pride comes from the
heart and
mind of my parents wanting me to be happy. I'm
sharing this with you so you can understand your
mother, understand her heart, and
treat her well. It's
not that I don't argue with my mother
because I have a duty as a child, it's not that I'm
done. I understand my mother,
I understand her. If
you don't understand your mother in
this way, then all your judgments
about her are wrong, and
those are regrettable mistakes. They are
very
subjective judgments, judgments that are not true.  The
essence of the situation with my parents
is actually like this. From my perspective, in the context of the
Mind-Viewing and Enlightenment, I sincerely hope that you will
not be angry with your parents afterwards.
We should only try to
find ways to lessen their
anger.
When our parents are at peace and
happy,
after we understand this,
we realize that we are not angry with our parents. It's
not that we don't
have the right to be angry with them, but because we understand
them, we naturally don't get angry. Because we
understand,
we naturally don't get angry, and we will
think of many ways to bring
peace and happiness to our parents. Even
more importantly, we can
share our food and clothing with our parents, we can
endure hardship, but we will never let
our parents suffer. The value of
understanding, the value of determination, the value of
knowing the truth—that's what it is. It
brings us great peace and happiness. The Mind-Viewing and
Enlightenment is the same because we understand
this. My Mind-Viewing and Enlightenment has had this kind of
behavior since childhood.  Even now, when I
reflect on it, I
still think that in the next life, I
will develop even more in that aspect. I'm
sharing this with you all.  "Hey, when I was
little, I used to do math with my
sisters and me, helping Mom with the chores. Mom gave me
a little bit of luck. When I had free time, I'd
go do my own work to earn my own money.
So, in the family, I,
Hoan Quan, and my older sister
also worked, but that
money, Hoan Quan,
consciously saved it to
buy books, notebooks, pens so Mom would
n't have to buy them. That way, Mom
would be happy. But in Hoan Quan's case, my
sister, when she got that money,
she only bought things. She wanted to buy
whatever she liked. But Hoan Quan
always dedicated
that to helping Mom, not spending
a single penny,
not buying snacks. That means not spending anything
wastefully, completely saving it to help Mom,
to ease her burden. When I had a
girlfriend, Hoan Quan
told her, 'Mom doesn't have much,
so you have to contribute money, and
whenever you have some,' she'd like to."  If we have enough money for the wedding, we'll get married, but we ca
n't ask my mother for anything. My
boyfriend, Hoan, absolutely won't take any
dowry. He made a promise to me
that we wouldn't take
anything from my family, would
n't take anything from his family,
and wouldn't accept anything from him for the rest of our lives. No matter how poor we are, we ca
n't borrow
from his parents or ask for anything from them. We're
just givers, not receivers.
Even when I
got pregnant, Hoan contributed
some money and gave some to my
mother, telling her to buy
me a gift when I give birth. At that time, I had to maintain some dignity
with my husband, otherwise he would
blame my mother. Back then, Hoan
had 400,000 dong, which was a lot of money.
Back then, a
chicken only cost 30,000 dong. "Mom, buy a
chicken and stew it for me," he said.
Of course, stewed chicken tastes
delicious. But...  The
first time I went to the restaurant, I
told my mother, 'Mom, I have too much fish, I don't like
eating it.' That means Uncle Hoang's heart is
entirely devoted to
his mother, and from then until she gets
old, Uncle Hoang
always gives her money to spend whenever he works. He
hasn't mentioned
this to the stock market center. The restaurant is sharing this with fellow devotees not
to boast about himself, but because it's something he
truly understands. He
feels very happy when he truly understands his
mother's heart, and he can do the same. Uncle Hoang
hopes that
young people will understand the true meaning of
their mother's heart, and they will
do the same. Uncle Hoang's restaurant has
a rule,
not a violation, that husbands
and children are never allowed to do anything
bad to their parents. My Tam's
shelter doesn't allow
that, and Uncle Hoang also told
his husband that if he insults his
mother, or his father, or his siblings, even just once, then... (
This is a private matter).  It's never okay to
apologize; we'll just end up in court and break
up. And I'm the same; I'll never
offend your parents and siblings, never. And with a clear
mind, you should
absolutely do that. Uncle
Hoan really wants
you to understand your parents, to truly understand the
truth about their hearts,
so you can repay their kindness whether you're
poor or rich, sick or
healthy. You can still repay their kindness, and you should
never put yourself on equal footing with
your parents. Because some people, or some
friends, put themselves on equal footing with
their parents, so they judge, "
How awful!" or "My parents are like
this or that," but Uncle Hoan's mind
adjusts and recognizes without judging. He
recognizes that these issues of his mother aren't yet
perfect,
these issues of his father aren't yet perfect, so he learns about them. And for
anything that isn't perfect, he
finds ways to help
his parents, to
gradually alleviate their problems. And with a clear mind,
he succeeds in a certain way.  It's wonderful
that the heart of support and the mind of the Venerable Master
Hoang has gently guided his parents into
the ocean of Buddhist teachings. The newly enlightened mind of the Venerable Master Hoan Quan has
reached its final moments, and before his
parents depart, everyone is completely clear-minded, cultivating Bodhicitta
in a
gentle way. Therefore, the mind of the Venerable Master Hoan Quan
wants to share his experience with a humble request:
that all young people
understand and act accordingly. But the mind of the Venerable Master Hoan Quan is even
more enlightened and perceptive, and
that is truly the
joy. So
when his parents pass
away, the Venerable Master Hoan Quan is not tormented or
regretful. That is, he is not suffering from
any distress caused by his
actions. However, there are still
small mistakes that the mind of the Venerable Master Hoan Quan recognizes.
From the next life
onwards, if he has parents, he will strive to be
more perfect, even more perfect. Even then,
he is still not satisfied, he must strive to be even
more perfect, and make many more
mistakes. In the future, he will not make even the smallest mistake
towards his parents. That is, if he has
such a mind...  I never
judge, I never consider myself
equal to my parents. I never
judge whether my parents' behavior towards
me is right or wrong. My mind, as a
Buddhist monk, never judges my parents' behavior towards me. In my heart, I, as a Buddhist monk, never judge
my parents' behavior towards me.
No matter
who my parents are, no matter how bad their behavior is, it's
inconvenient to accept it. I'm always supportive and understanding,
but I don't let myself and
my parents be equal. I don't give myself
the right to be equal to my parents, or
even demand more. Never think that
my parents are less knowledgeable than me.
Never use phrases like this. My mind, I
've heard many people say, "
What do you know to say that?" My mind, as a Buddhist monk,
feels that it's really disrespectful.
Using that word again is very rude.
Why would you say, "My parents don't
know anything, my child, don't know anything, you don't know,
you don't get involved, don't say that." My
mind, as a Buddhist monk, has
never said that. I feel that phrase is
very... I do
n't...  My mind was in a panic, I didn't even
know what words to use to express it. I
could never use that phrase, I
couldn't use that phrase for
my parents. Why would you say my parents
don't know anything? Well,
if I'm in a certain field,
I might understand things a little better than my parents because of the social situation,
but I can't
say my parents don't know anything. It's not like
that. It's just that
my parents haven't been exposed
to the issue, they don't
understand it clearly. It's the same with me; if
I haven't been exposed to it, I don't understand it. If I
want to
work on this issue, I'll
say something different, or, "
Mom, just leave this issue there, I'll do it this way," or "
I'll research this one, it's different," and there are
many other issues. Or, it's just
that I'm the one who decides,
and my parents are just participating. Well,
I could also say, "Yes, I'll consider it." And besides, Dad's mind is still too much. And Dad's
mind is too much. At the
restaurant, Dad's mind is too
much.  He's a very talkative person,
sometimes when it comes to a problem, he's
very thick-skinned. Everyone says he talks too
much, but his mindset is very
normal. Even when I complain about
it now, I don't feel bothered
by it. And when I hear about a problem,
I accept what I can, and leave
what I can't.
My parents aren't there to force
me to do anything. As long as
I live a good and virtuous life, that's
enough. In all matters,
my parents only participate in that way. So,
you should understand and treat your parents' opinions well.
Here, Uncle Hoang Quan is sharing this
with Thao, and with everyone
in the group in general. For
those who still have their mothers, we should understand and
treat them well.
That merit prevents us from holding grudges against
our friends for long, and allows us to always think clearly and logically. That's what I
call the "field of
writing" between myself and my friends,
because I have this habit of thinking like this.  So,
regarding my mother, I will develop that
habit of thinking in all my
relationships with my family and friends.
I will never lose those
relationships. This is the benefit
I get from my mother. Therefore,
consider this carefully. Uncle Hoan sincerely hopes that you can
treat
your parents in the best way possible
in the process of perfecting
your character. I wish you all to
be truly filial children, as my master has
taught.